# WikiI5Converter

WikiI5Converter converts WikiXML pages, output from WikiXMLConverter, into a single-file I5 corpus as required for DeReKo. 

## Instructions

WikiI5Converter requires an index of the WikiXML files generated by WikiXMLConverter, see [WikiXML index](https://github.com/IDS-Mannheim/Wikipedia-Corpus-Builder/tree/master/WikiI5Converter#wikixml-index). To annotate inflectives, a file containing a list of inflectives must be configured in the property file, see [Properties](https://github.com/IDS-Mannheim/WikiI5Converter/tree/master#properties) and [Inflectives](https://github.com/IDS-Mannheim/Wikipedia-Corpus-Builder/tree/master/WikiI5Converter#inflectives). 

The XSLT transformation in WikiI5Converter is done by using a Saxon-EE library, which is a commercial variant. In the development, we use saxon9ee-9.4.0.3J.jar. Both the saxon-ee jar and its license (saxon-license.lic) are needed for the conversion and should be put together in a lib/ folder. While running the WikiI5Converter tool, the lib/ folder must be added to the java classpath. The command format below describes how to run WikiI5Converter in a terminal. The outputs and error messages are to be written into the a log file.

```java -Xmx4g -cp "[jar-file]:lib/*:." [main-class] -prop [properties-file-path] > [log-file-path] 2>&1```

The main class of WikiI5Converter is ```de.mannheim.ids.wiki.WikiI5Converter```. Similar to the WikiXMLConverter, we advise to set the java memory allocation pool to convert a full Wikipedia by using -Xmx parameter.

Command example:

```java -Xmx4g -cp "code/WikiI5Converter-1.0.1.jar:lib/*:." de.mannheim.ids.wiki.WikiI5Converter -prop properties/i5-dewiki-article.properties > logs/wikiI5-dewiki-20150808-article.log 2>&1```


## Properties

WikiI5Converter requires the following properties in a properties file:

* ```wikidump = dewiki-20130728-pages-meta-current.xml```

    The name of the Wikidump is used to create the final Wiki I5 corpus metadata.

* ```page_type = article```

  The type of the Wikipedia pages.

* ```language = Deutsch```

    The language name of the Wikipedia dump in its language.

* ```korpusSigle = WPD13```

    The code or identifier for the corpus level.

* ```namespace_key = 0```

    The namespace of the WikiXML files.


* ```wikixml_folder = wikixml-de/articles```

    The location of WikiXML files to convert (root folder).

* ```wikixml_index = index/dewiki-article-index.xml```
    
    The index of the WikiXML files to convert. See [WikiXMLIndex](https://github.com/IDS-Mannheim/Wikipedia-Corpus-Builder/tree/master/WikiI5Converter#wikixml-index) to generate such index.
    
* ```output_file = i5/de/dewiki-20130728-articles.i5.xml```

    The output filename/path, namely where and how the final corpus should be named.
   
* ```db_url = jdbc:mysql://localhost:port/dbname```

    The URL of the database containing the corresponding ```langlinks``` table. See [Language Links](https://github.com/IDS-Mannheim/Wikipedia-Corpus-Builder/tree/master/WikiI5Converter#language-links).
    
* ```db_username = username```

    The username to connect to the database.
    
* ```db_password = password```

    The corresponding password to the username to connect to the database.

* ```creator = creator name```

    The name of the person creating the corpus. It will be included in the idsHeader.
 
* ```category = Kategorie```

    The prefix of category page titles in language of the Wiki used to identify category links.
    
* ```category_scheme = https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kategorie:!Hauptkategorie```

    A Wikipedia page used as the scheme or reference to the categories.
 
 The following properties are optional:
 
 * ```max_threads = 2```

    The number of maximum threads allowed to run concurrently. Default is 1.
    
 * ```output_encoding = iso-8859-1```

    The encoding of the output file (how the final corpus should be encoded). Default is  
 
 * ```inflective_file = inflectives.xml```

    The location of the inflectives file. See [Inflectives](https://github.com/IDS-Mannheim/Wikipedia-Corpus-Builder/tree/master/WikiI5Converter#inflectives).
 

## WikiXML index

The WikiXML index lists all the WikiXML files generated by WikiXMLConverter. This index can be generated by using the shell script ```WikiXMLCorpusIndexer.sh``` that takes 3 arguments: 

        ```[Wikipage type] [WikiXML corpus folder] [output file]```

 Command example:
 
 ```./WikiXMLCorpusIndexer.sh article WikiXML-de/article article-index.xml```


creates an index (article-index.xml) of all the WikiXML files in the folder WikiXML-de/article. The resulting index has the following structure:

<pre>

    &lt;wiki type="article"&gt;
     &lt;index value="0"&gt;
        &lt;id>179&lt;/id&gt;
         ...
     &lt;/index&gt;
     ...
     &lt;index value="A"&gt;
        &lt;id>1&lt;/id&gt;
          ...
     &lt;/index&gt;
          ...          
    &lt;/wiki&gt;

</pre>

A WikiXML index is required by WikiI5Converter to access Wikipages and arrange them in the final I5 corpus. Thus, it is necessary to index the WikiXML files before running WikiI5Converter.

## Test suite

To run the test suite, a MySQL database with name ```wikipedia``` is required. By default, the MySQL server should run on port ```3306```.  You may change the database name and the port, but you must update the ```db_url``` in properties files accordingly (see ```src/test/resources```). 

The command to create a MySQL database by using a MySQL shell is:

```CREATE DATABASE [database_name];```

For our test database, run:

```CREATE DATABASE wikipedia;```

Add a user with all privileges to access the database:

```GRANT all privileges ON wikipedia.* TO 'wikiuser'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'wikipass';```

By default, we use ```wikiuser``` as the username and ```wikipass``` as the password. You may change the username and the password, and update the ```db_username``` and ```db_password``` in the properties files accordingly.

Moreover, ```de_langlinks``` and ```de_page``` tables are required. Please download the SQL dumps of the tables and restore them to the database as described in the following sections.


## Language links

Most of Wikipedia articles of a certain language have comparable pages in the Wikipedias of other languages. The links to these comparable pages are not explicitly written in the Wikidumps, but stored separately in a form of a database table. A table of Wikipedia langlinks contains information about the page titles in different languages. The page titles are connected to each other by means of their page ids.

To obtain language link information of a Wikipedia, the corresponding language link SQL dump of a Wikipedia dump must be downloaded and then restored to a database. 

In a unix shell, restore the language link SQL dump:

```mysql -u root -p [database_name] < [sql_dump_file]```

The database will contain a table ```langlinks``` with 3 columns: 
* ```ll_from``` lists the Wikipage ids
* ```ll_lang``` lists the language of the Wikipedias
* ```ll_title``` lists the page title in different languages.

To distinguish the tables of Wikipedias of different languages, the table name ```langlinks``` should be renamed to ```[2-letter languagecode]_langlinks```. For instance, ```langlinks``` table from a German Wikipedia dump can be renamed into ```de_langlinks``` by using the following MySQL command:

```RENAME TABLE langlinks TO de_langlinks;```

Using the langlinks table, Wikipedia page titles across the Wikipedias of different languages can be listed by Wikipage ids. For instance, the following command:

```SELECT * FROM de_langlinks WHERE ll_from = 3;```

lists all the Wikipedia page titles in other languages for the German Wikipage of id number 3. The table below describes a snapshot of the select results.

<pre>
+---------+----------+--------------------------------------------+
| ll_from | ll_lang  | ll_title                                   |
+---------+----------+--------------------------------------------+
|       3 | af       | Aktinium                                   | 
|       3 | ar       | أكتينيوم                                   | 
|       3 | ast      | Actiniu                                    | 
|       3 | az       | Aktinium                                   | 
|       3 | be       | Актыній                                    | 
</pre>
From this table, language links to other Wikipedias can be easily generated by using the following format:

```https://[ll_lang].wikipedia.org/wiki/[ll_title]```

This information is also needed to create the ```<relatedItem type="langlink">``` in each Wiki page (```<idsText>```) in a Wiki I5 corpus. Thus, before running WikiI5Converter, it is necessary to first restore and rename the langlinks table that corresponds to the current Wikidump.


## Wiki Page info

Wikipedia talk pages do not have any language links. To make the talk pages more comparable as in comparable Wikipedia corpora of different languages, we add the language-links of the corresponding articles of the talk pages as their metadata. For example, for the German talk page ```Diskussion:Afrika```, the following metadata is added:

<pre>
&lt;biblStruct&gt;
  &lt;relatedItem type="langlink"&gt;
    &lt;ref target="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Africa" xml:lang="en"&gt;Africa
    &lt;/ref&gt;
  &lt;/relatedItem&gt;
  &lt;relatedItem type="langlink"&gt;
    &lt;ref target="https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afrique" xml:lang="fr"&gt;Afrique
    &lt;/ref&gt;
  &lt;/relatedItem&gt;
&lt;/biblStruct&gt;
</pre> 

To generate such metadata, the corresponding article page id of the talk page is needed. The page id can be acquired from the Wikipedia page SQL dump provided in the Wikipedia dump website.

To restore the page SQL dump to a database, run:

```mysql -u root -p [database_name] < [sql_dump_file]```
  
To distinguish the page table of different languages, rename it with a 2-letter language code. For example for the german page table:  

```RENAME TABLE page TO de_page;```

Now we can try to select the article page_id of a Wiki talk page by using its page title. The page titles of articles and talk pages are identical, except that the talk pages include a title prefix such as "Diskussion:" in German. The title prefix must therefore be omitted from the page title. 

```SELECT page_id FROM de_page WHERE page_title ='Afrika' AND page_namespace=0;```

<pre> 
+---------+
| page_id |
+---------+
| 5924716 |
+---------+
</pre>

Using the page id, we can select the language links of the articles using the ```de_langlinks``` table, as described in previous the section.


## Corpus structure
              
An I5 corpus has a tripartite structure, consisting of the corpus, document and text level. The root element is ```<idsCorpus>``` having ```korpusSigle``` as identifier, for instance WPD15 denotes German Wiki I5 corpus from a dump taken in 2019. The ```<idsCorpus>``` element consist of many ```<idsDoc>``` elements, and an ```<idsDoc>``` contain many ```<idsText>``` elements. Each of these elements has an ```<idsHeader>``` describing the contents of the corresponding elements.

Similar to the WikiXML index, each ```<idsDoc>``` is ordered by alphabets and numbers representing the first character of the page/text titles. The documents are further grouped by the text ids, that is every 10 million ids. Document identifiers known as ```documentSigle``` are 1-letter and 2-digit text group ids combined with the ```korpusSigle```. For instance, ```WPD19/A00``` contains all texts with ids are between 1 to 9999999, and ```WPD19/A01``` between 10000000 to 1999999. Text identifiers combine the ```korpusSigle``` and their corresponding ```dokumentSigle``` with the text id. For instance, ```WPD19.A00.0000001``` is the textSigle of idsText,  i.e. the Wikipage with id 1 having a title starting with A.
  

## XSLT Transformation

The XSLT transformation is only done for ```<idsText>```. The other corpus structures and document sorting are done in Java. The main XSLT file creates the ```<idsHeader>``` for ```<idsText>``` and groups WikiXML by headings (see ```/src/main/resources/Templates.xsl```). It includes the additional XSLT file containing various templates handling different XML tags.

## Logs

The log file lists all the WikiXML files going through the transformation process. Not all WikiXML files, however, are successfully transformed. The statistics of the transformation process is summarized in the end of the log file. An example summary of the German Wiki I5 conversion is shown below.

<pre>
Number of transformed pages: 2065940
Number of empty pages: 0
Number of not-transformed pages (char index): 7745
Number of transformation errors: 2
Number of DTD validation errors: 14
Number of non well-formed XML: 2
Total number valid pages: 2065922
WikiI5Converter execution time 22:03:45
</pre>

As described in the WikiXMLIndex section, some WikiXML files whose titles cannot be normalized are put into a char/ folder, and these files are ignored for transformation. Transformation errors are errors that are thrown by Saxon API during the XSLT transformation. After a successful transformation, the resulting ```<idsText>``` elements are validated against the [I5 DTD](http://corpora.ids-mannheim.de/I5/DTD/i5.dtd) by using a SAX Parser. The number of DTD validation errors shows the total of invalid pages. The total number of valid pages shows the number of Wikipages in the final corpus.


## Inflectives

Interaction words or inflectives orthographically represent speaker’s actions, gestures or facial expressions (e.g. ```*giggle*```) in a written conversation. They appear frequently in the conversations among the users in Wikipedia talk pages and are of particular interest in the linguistic analysis of CMC. Sometimes, interaction words are even used as (pseudo) mark-up, as in ```<seufz>nicht</seufz>```. 

I5 adopted the CMC structured proposed by Beißwenger et al. (2012) as an extension to the TEI P5 scheme. In I5, pseudo mark-up with interaction words is encoded as in the following:

<pre>
  &lt;p>Bitte 
   &lt;interactionTerm&gt;
      &lt;interactionWord id="WDD15.A00.00131-1-iaw1" n="1" 
      next="WDD15.A00.00131-2-iaw2" topology="openingTag"&gt;
      &amp;lt;seufz&amp;gt;&lt;/interactionWord&gt;
   &lt;/interactionTerm&gt;
  nicht
   &lt;interactionTerm&gt;
      &lt;interactionWord id="WDD15.A00.00131-2-iaw2" n="2" 
      prev="WDD15.A00.00131-1-iaw1" topology="closingTag"&gt;
      &amp;lt;/seufz&amp;gt;&lt;/interactionWord&gt;
   &lt;/interactionTerm&gt;
  alles mit Grossbuchstaben beginnen, sondern und neue 
  Rechtschreibung, wenn möglich&lt;/p&gt;

</pre>

WikiI5Converter relies on a list of interaction words to recognize them in WikiXML and it only deals with interaction words that are marked as tags, for instance ```<seufz>```. The lists of interaction words vary for different languages. We only provide a list of interactionWord for German. The interaction words (inflectives) are contained on the file that is givern as “inflective_list” in the properties file and must be listed as follows.

<pre>
&lt;inflectives&gt;
  &lt;name>abgreif&lt;/name&gt;
  &lt;name>auf-die-Nägel-blas&lt;/name&gt;
  &lt;name>Augenverdreh&lt;/name&gt;
  &lt;name>ausrück&lt;/name&gt;
  &lt;name>dazwischen-quetsch&lt;/name&gt;
  &lt;name>dazwischenquetsch&lt;/name&gt;
  &lt;name>Dazwischenquetsch&lt;/name&gt;
  &lt;name>Doppelseufz&lt;/name&gt;
         …
&lt;/inflectives&gt;
</pre>


## Footnotes

In Wikitext, footnote descriptions are typically written directly where the footnotes themselves are placed. In the instance below, a footnote is marked by the element ```<ref>```.

<pre>
Von 1968 bis 2000 wurde es von der [[Directors Guild of America]] (DGA) für 
solche Situationen empfohlen, seither ist es '''Thomas Lee'''.&lt;ref&gt;
[[Los Angeles Times|latimes]].com: [http://articles.latimes.com/2000/jan/
15/entertainment/ca-54271 ''Name of Director Smithee Isn't What It Used 
to Be''], zuletzt geprüft am 2. April 2011&lt;/ref&gt; 
</pre>

In I5, we make a distinction between footnote places and descriptions. In a footnote place, a ```<ptr>``` element is added refering to a ```<note>``` element in the footnote list. The footnote list includes the desciptions of all footnotes. It is written in the ```<back>``` element after all text is written in the ```<body>``` element. 

A pointer at the footnote appearance:

<pre>
Von 1968 bis 2000 wurde es von der &lt;ref target="https://de.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Directors_Guild_of_America" targOrder="u"&gt;Directors Guild of America
&lt;/ref&gt; (DGA) für solche Situationen empfohlen, seither ist es &lt;hi 
rend="bo" &gt;Thomas Lee&lt;/hi&gt;.&lt;ptr target="WPD17.A00.00001-f1" rend="ref" 
targType="note" targOrder="u"/&gt;
</pre>

A footnote list:
<pre>
&lt;back&gt;
    &lt;div n="1" complete="y" type="footnotes" part="N" org="uniform" sample="complete"&gt;
        &lt;note id="WPD17.A00.00001-f1" place="foot" anchored="true"&gt;
            &lt;ref target="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Los_Angeles_Times" targOrder="u"
                &gt;latimes&lt;/ref&gt;.com:&lt;ref
                target="http://articles.latimes.com/2000/jan/15/entertainment/ca-54271"
                targOrder="u"/&gt;, zuletzt geprüft am 2. April 2011&lt;/note&gt;
        &lt;note id="WPD17.A00.00001-f2" place="foot" anchored="true"&gt;
            &lt;ref target="http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000647/" targOrder="u"&gt;Eigener Eintrag für in
                der IMDb&lt;/ref&gt;
        &lt;/note&gt;        
    &lt;/div&gt;
&lt;/back&gt;
</pre>  


## Categories

Wikipedia articles often contain category links at the end of their pages. In I5, the category links are placed in the ```<idsHeader>``` element of the corresponding ```<idsText>``` element of a Wikipedia page.

<pre>
&lt;idsText id="WPD17.A00.00001" n="de.Alan_Smithee" version="1"&gt;
    &lt;idsHeader type="text" pattern="text" status="new" version="1.0" TEIform="teiHeader"&gt;
        &lt;profileDesc&gt;
            &lt;textClass Default="n"&gt;
                &lt;classCode scheme="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal:Contents/Categories"&gt;
                    &lt;ref target="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kategorie%3AFiktive_Person"
                        targOrder="u"&gt;Smithee, Alan&lt;/ref&gt;
                    &lt;ref target="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kategorie%3APseudonym" targOrder="u"
                        &gt;Kategorie:Pseudonym&lt;/ref&gt;
                    &lt;ref target="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kategorie%3ASammelpseudonym"
                        targOrder="u"&gt;Smithee, Alan&lt;/ref&gt;
                    &lt;ref target="https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kategorie%3AWerk_von_Alan_Smithee"
                        targOrder="u"&gt;Kategorie:Werk von Alan Smithee&lt;/ref&gt;
                &lt;/classCode&gt;
            &lt;/textClass&gt;
        &lt;/profileDesc&gt;
    &lt;/idsHeader&gt;
&lt;/idsText&gt;

</pre>


## References
              
Beißwenger, M., Ermakova, M., Geyken, A., Lemnitzer, L., and Storrer, A. (2012). A tei schema for the representation of computer-mediated communication. Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative [Online], 3.

Margaretha, E., and Lüngen,H. (2014). Building linguistic corpora from Wikipedia articles and discussions.  Journal for Language Technologie and Computational Linguistics (JLCL), 2/2014.

Lüngen, H., and Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. (2012). A TEI P5 Document Grammar for the IDS Text Model. Journal of the Text Encoding Initiative [Online], 3. URL : http://jtei.revues.org/508 ; DOI : 10.4000/jtei.508

